Global parameters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let us discuss the procedure on the basis of the *transcritical normal form*, which reads

.. math:: :label: eqodetranscriticnf
    
    \partial_t x=rx-x^2\,, 

where :math:`r` is the parameter. As usual, the stationary solutions can be obtained by setting :math:`\partial_tx=0`, which yields the two stationary solutions :math:`x_{0}=0` and :math:`x_{0}=r`. The stability of these solutions can also be assessed easily by hand. One just introduces a perturbed solution :math:`x(t)=x_0+\delta x(t)` and linearizes the dynamics of :math:`\delta x`:

.. math::

   \begin{aligned}
   \partial_t \left(\delta x\right)=&+r\delta x &\quad \text{for}\quad x_0=0\\
   \partial_t \left(\delta x\right)=&-r\delta x &\quad \text{for}\quad x_0=r
   \end{aligned}

Obviously, when :math:`r` passes :math:`0`, the dynamics of the system changes. For :math:`r<0`, the stationary solution :math:`x_0=0` is stable and :math:`x_0=r` is unstable, whereas it is vice versa for :math:`r>0`.

In pyoomph, we again formulate the very simple equation class for this, passing some value (or expression) as parameter ``r``:

.. literalinclude:: bifurcation_transient_transcritical.py
   :language: python
   :start-at: class TranscriticalNormalForm(ODEEquations):
   :end-at: self.add_residual((partial_t(x)-self.r*x+x**2)*x_test)

In the problem class, we use :py:meth:`~pyoomph.generic.problem.Problem.define_global_parameter` to define a global parameter object with an initial value. This parameter is defined on the problem level. When combined in an expression, automatically its symbolical (i.e. adjustable) value will be used. However, unlike :py:func:`~pyoomph.expressions.generic.var`, parameters are not considered to be unknowns of the system. To adjust the value of a parameter, we can access the current value by the property ``value``. If we apply ``float()`` to an expression containing a parameter, the current ``value`` will be substituted.

.. literalinclude:: bifurcation_transient_transcritical.py
   :language: python
   :start-at: class TranscriticalProblem(Problem):
   :end-at: self.add_equations(eq@"transcritical")

Let us first run the problem as before, namely by using the :py:meth:`~pyoomph.generic.problem.Problem.run` method of the :py:class:`~pyoomph.generic.problem.Problem` class:

.. literalinclude:: bifurcation_transient_transcritical.py
   :language: python
   :start-at: if __name__=="__main__":
   :end-at: problem.run(endtime=40, numouts=100)  # And let it evolve towards the now stable branch x=0

We first set :math:`r=1`, but start close to the unstable branch :math:`x=0`. In the output, we will see an initial exponential growth of :math:`x(t)`, followed by a convergence into the stable branch at :math:`x=r=1`. However, after :math:`t=20`, we change the parameter value. This feature, i.e. modifying a system parameter, is only possible with parameters as constructed here. Changes in other properties, e.g. the initial condition :math:`x_0` or the harmonic oscillator frequency :math:`\omega` in the first examples within this book have no effect after the problem has been initialized, since the code is generated based on the values at the beginning. However, global parameters are still variables within the generated code and they are re-evaluated every single time step. Therefore, it is possible to change the value of :math:`r` in between.

After setting :math:`r=-1`, the dynamics of the system entirely changes. In particular, the branch :math:`x_0=1`, which the solution was just trying to attain, has now moved to :math:`x_0=-1=r`. Furthermore, as discussed before, :math:`x=0` has now become the stable branch. Therefore, the output for :math:`t>20`, generated by the second :py:meth:`~pyoomph.generic.problem.Problem.run` statement, will show how :math:`x` approaches :math:`0` instead, see :numref:`figodetranscrittemporal`.

..  figure:: transcrittemporal.*
	:name: figodetranscrittemporal
	:align: center
	:alt: Temporal integration of the transcritical normal form
	:class: with-shadow
	:width: 100%
	
	Temporal integration of the transcritical normal form with a switch of the parameter :math:`r` at :math:`t=20`. Depending on :math:`r`, the stationary solution at :math:`x=0` is either unstable or stable.

.. only:: html

	.. container:: downloadbutton

		:download:`Download this example <bifurcation_transient_transcritical.py>`
		
		:download:`Download all examples <../../tutorial_example_scripts.zip>`   	
		
